# Sex Selective Abortions and Spacing

**Purpose:** Write paper for Demography based on original rejected version. 
This version focuses on spacing and how access to sex selection affects it.
Furthermore, the paper examines how the changes in spacing affects fertility estimates
and infant mortality.
A separate version will examine fertility and sex selection in more detail.

## Directory structure

You need the following directories for the code to run:

- rawData: original data files (please note, you will have to request access to the data from [DHS](https://dhsprogram.com) yourself)
- code: data cleaning, variables, and analysis
- data: derived data files and results
- figures: generated figures and other figures for paper
- tables: generated tables

In addition, the following directories has writing in them:

- paper: the paper itself, together with snippets and notes
- presentations: various presentations, each its own tex file
- response: referee reports and responses
- final: the final submitted version with tables and graphs (not autogenerated)

##  Generating files

All figures, tables, and pdfs are generated by running `make`.
If you want only a specific file use `make <fileName>`.
See the "Makefile" in the base directory for more information 
on what files are included.

All code assume that you have Stata-SE installed and ready
to run in batch mode (Stata -> Install Terminal Utility if you
are on Mac or Windows; if you are on Unix type system ensure 
that `stata-se` is in your path).
Stata has to be version 15 or later.
Make sure you do not have your profile automatically change
working directory (to something like cd ~/data for example).
If you do, make will not run the Stata files correctly.

Finally, make sure you install the user generated packages detailed 
in the `ReadMe.md` file in the `code` directory.
The bootstrap code will not run without these.

The PDF of final paper is created using XeLaTeX with the TeX
Gyre Pagella fonts.
The fonts are freely available here:
- [Math font](http://www.gust.org.pl/projects/e-foundry/tg-math/index_html)
- [Text font](http://www.gust.org.pl/projects/e-foundry/tex-gyre/pagella)

If you are on a Mac, the easiest approach is to download the OTF files, 
then open Font Book and add the font files that way.
