**Sex selective abortion in India: a practice that continues to our
days**

*Claus C. Pörtner*

**BIO**. Department of Economics, Albers School of Business and
Economics, Seattle University, WA, USA and Center for Studies in
Demography and Ecology, University of Washington, USA.

***Summary.** In India, the male-to-female ratio at birth has been on
the increase since the mid-1980s. **Claus Pörtner** shows that the
increasing use of sex selection substantially lengthened birth
intervals. This rapid lengthening, in turn, is responsible for a
significant downward bias in the total fertility rate compared to
predicted cohort fertility.*

**Introduction**

The introduction of ultrasound in India in the mid-1980s ushered in an
era of rapidly increasing use of sex-selective abortions. One well-known
impact is that more boys were born relative to girls. A less-known
effect is that each sex-selective abortion delays the next birth by 6 to
12 months, resulting in longer durations between births.

The duration between births---also known as birth spacing---is relevant
for three reasons. First, spacing can help us understand the degree of
son preference. Before sex selection, demographers used spacing to
measure son preference since, traditionally, Indian women had their next
child sooner if they had not yet had a son. Now, increases in spacing
can tell us about the extent of sex selection.

Second, shorter durations between births negatively affect children's
health. Specifically, very short birth intervals increase child
mortality, including that of already born children (please cite:
https://www.niussp.org/health-and-mortality/closely-spaced-births-reduce-survival-chances-of-existing-and-future-children/).
Hence, the traditional shorter birth intervals for women without sons
may partly explain girls' higher mortality risk compared to boys in
India.

Finally, lengthening birth intervals makes our most commonly used
fertility measure---the total fertility rate (TFR)---decline faster than
cohort fertility, which is how many children women eventually have. This
phenomenon is known as a tempo effect. It arises because the TFR is a
period fertility measure based on how many births women across all age
groups had in a given period, often the last year (Bongaarts,
[1999](#ref-Bongaarts1999); Hotz et al., [1997](#ref-Hotz1997); Nı́
Bhrolcháin, [2011](#ref-Ni-Bhrolchain2011)).

In a recent paper, I examine how Hindu women's birth spacing has changed
over the 1972--2016 period, focusing on the effects of the spread of sex
selection (Pörtner, [2021](#ref-Portner2021)). The data comes from the
first four National Family and Health Surveys. In the absence of sons,
the desire to use sex selection appears to increase with lower desired
fertility and higher parity, where parity is the number of live births
so far (Jayachandran, [2017](#ref-Jayachandran2017); Pörtner,
[2015](#ref-Portner2015b)). Thus, birth intervals should lengthen most
for women with no sons, lower desired fertility, and better access to
sex selection for a given parity.

**The use of sex selection is not declining**

The data show two broad trends over the last four decades. First, the
likelihood of a subsequent birth has decreased over time. Not
surprisingly, given the son preference in India, the probability of
having another child is much lower if the mother already has one or more
sons.

Second, sex ratios have become more male-dominated for women with no
sons, illustrating the spread of sex selection. In the absence of a son,
male-to-female ratios at birth are higher, the more educated the mother
and the more children she already has.

Despite predictions that sex selection use will eventually decline,
there is no clear evidence of this yet. The most likely users of sex
selection continue to show substantial male-biased sex ratios. More
concerning, increasingly male-biased sex ratios among less-educated
women suggest that sex selection appears to be spreading as the
fertility of this group falls.

**Modest increases in birth spacing, except with sex selection**

When sex selection is not used, the median birth intervals have
increased relatively little---only three to six months over the four
decades---compared to around 3.5 months *per decade* in other countries
with declining fertility (Casterline and Odden,
[2016](#ref-Casterline2016)). These birth intervals cover births to
women with no education and women who have already had one or more sons,
regardless of their education level. A remarkably high proportion of
these birth intervals are still very short. Except for the most
educated, 25% or more have their second and third child within 24 months
of the previous birth, substantially below the 24 months between
pregnancies the WHO recommends. Furthermore, son preference is still
evident in these intervals, with the shortest birth spacing occurring
when a family has only girls.

The story is very different when sex selection is used. Well-educated
women with no sons had the most substantial lengthening of birth
intervals and the most male-biased sex ratios, evidence of very
significant use of sex-selective abortions. For example, among women
with 12 or more years of education, almost 80% of third births were boys
if the women already had two daughters. On top of that, the 75th
percentile birth interval length is nearly 70 months, a 21-month
increase over four decades. Strikingly, more than 70% of this increase
occurred in the first decade after the introduction of sex selection.

Therefore, some women with no sons now have *longer* birth intervals
than those with sons, reversing India's traditional spacing pattern.
Although this change is manifestly not because of declining son
preference, it does open the possibility of unintended positive effects
on the prior daughters' health and survival. Girls-only families are now
less likely to have very short birth intervals, and that may, by itself,
improve girls' survival chances.

**Spread of sex selection makes us overestimate fertility decline**

A rapidly expanding use of sex selection increases the time between
births, making the TFR a downward-biased estimate of cohort fertility.
That is precisely what appeared to have happened in India. The period
fertility rate substantially overestimated how fast cohort fertility
fell in the 1990s and early 2000s, as spacing initially increased with
the spreading use of sex selection. Although the two fertility measures
have recently partly converged, predicted cohort fertility is still
10%--20% higher than the period fertility rate. To boot, predicted
cohort fertility is still at or above replacement level for all but the
best-educated urban women.

These results paint a less rosy picture of India's prospects for a
continued reduction in population growth than generally accepted. With
predicted cohort fertility still substantially higher than the period
fertility rate, India's TFR will likely stabilize or even increase as
birth intervals slow their lengthening. Perversely, the more successful
the attempts at combatting sex selection are, the more likely an
increase in the TFR will be. This increase comes partly from reducing
the length of birth intervals if sex-selective abortions are unavailable
and partly from families needing more births to reach at least one son.

**References**

[]{#ref-Bongaarts1999 .anchor}Bongaarts, J., 1999. The fertility impact
of changes in the timing of childbearing in the developing world.
Population Studies 53, 277--289.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00324720308088>

[]{#ref-Casterline2016 .anchor}Casterline, J.B., Odden, C., 2016. Trends
in inter-birth intervals in developing countries 1965--2014. Population
and Development Review 42, 173--194.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2016.00134.x>

[]{#ref-Hotz1997 .anchor}Hotz, V.J., Klerman, J.A., Willis, R.J., 1997.
The economics of fertility in developed countries, in: Rosenzweig, M.R.,
Stark, O. (Eds.), Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Elsevier
B.V, pp. 275--347.

[]{#ref-Jayachandran2017 .anchor}Jayachandran, S., 2017. Fertility
decline and missing women. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
9, 118--39. <https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20150576>

[]{#ref-Ni-Bhrolchain2011 .anchor}Nı́ Bhrolcháin, M., 2011. Tempo and the
TFR. Demography 48, 841--861.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-011-0033-4>

[]{#ref-Portner2021 .anchor}Pörtner, C.C., 2021. Birth Spacing and
Fertility in the Presence of Son Preference and Sex-Selective Abortions:
India's Experience Over Four Decades. Demography.
<https://doi.org/10.1215/00703370-9580703>

[]{#ref-Portner2015b .anchor}Pörtner, C.C., 2015. Sex-selective
abortions, fertility, and birth spacing (World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 7189). World Bank, Washington, DC.
